Added Key concepts of observability (#58)
siglens/siglens-docs: docs/key-concepts.md

# Key Concepts

> Observability and monitoring are crucial in modern software development and operations. It’s all about understanding, monitoring, and fixing complex systems using data collection, analysis, and visualization. When organizations use observability and monitoring effectively, they can spot and solve problems quickly, improve performance, and ensure their applications and infrastructure run smoothly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Observability and monitoring are crucial in modern software development and operations. It’s all about deeply understanding your applications, or infrastructure by observing data such as resource utilization, latency, and performance at a function-to-function level. This data can then be used to fix complex systems using data collection, analysis, and visualization. When organizations use observability and monitoring effectively, they can spot and solve problems quickly, improve performance, and ensure their applications and infrastructure run smoothly.
```

After this slight introduction, should we include a real-world example? Such as a server going down at 3am, Ops team using log data to quickly find the problem and recovering?

Author: Yes, an example would provide better clarity.

> Observability and monitoring essentially mean keeping a close eye on how systems behave and perform using logs and metrics. These logs and metrics are generated by various components within the system, including applications, servers, databases, and networking devices. They serve as valuable sources of information for understanding system health, diagnosing issues, and optimizing performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common type of Observability or Telemetry data that is used within various systems include logs, metrics and traces. These telemetry data are generated by various components within the system, including applications, servers, databases, and networking devices.
```

I think a lot of the information in here is the same as the first paragraph. Let's try and not be too repetitive with the information.

This is what a sample log data in a system would look like.

| Timestamp            | Event Description                       | Severity | Contextual Data                                    |
| -------------------- | --------------------------------------- | -------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| 2024-02-11T08:35:00Z | Application server started successfully | INFO     | Server: app-01, Environment: Production            |
| 2024-02-11T09:12:45Z | Disk usage exceeded threshold           | WARNING  | Server: db-03, Disk Usage: 85%, Threshold: 80%     |
| 2024-02-11T10:20:30Z | Critical error in database connection   | ERROR    | Server: db-02, Error Code: 500, Connection Timeout |
| 2024-02-11T11:05:15Z | User authentication failed              | ERROR    | Username: johndoe, IP: 192.168.1.100               |
| 2024-02-11T12:30:00Z | Scheduled job completed successfully    | INFO     | Job: Backup, Duration: 00:45:00                    |

> 

Reviewer: instead of writing these manually, would we want to attach a screenshot of some Log data?

Author: Even I thought the same. Apparently, the images don't look sharp enough, So I'll probably see if I can get a more intuitive image for this log data.

### Log ingestion

> As the name suggests, it refers to the process of **collecting and importing log data** from various sources into a centralized system for analysis and storage. It involves capturing log events generated by applications, servers, and other components, parsing and enriching the log data, and forwarding it to a centralized logging system or storage backend. Log ingestion systems often support various protocols and formats for data collection, including syslog, JSON, and structured logging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the name suggests, it refers to the process of **collecting and importing log data** from various sources into a centralized system for analysis and storage. It involves capturing log events generated by applications, servers, and other components, parsing and enriching the log data, and forwarding it to a centralized logging system or storage backend. Log ingestion systems often support various protocols and formats for data collection, including syslog, JSON, and structured logging.
```

This is slightly incorrect. Log ingestion doesn't involve capturing data. The capturing/generation of telemetry data is done by collectors. Ingestion is simply the process of sending the collected data to the centralized server.

Within Logs itself, let's have two more points. One about `Collectors` and another about `Retention` (period for how long the telemetry data is stored)

Author: Thanks for the insight, I'll research and make it more accurate

Yes, I'll add more info on Collectors and Retention

## 2. Metrics 📊

Metrics are quantitative measurements that provide insight into the **performance** and **health** of a system. Unlike logs, which provide detailed event-based information, metrics focus on numerical data points over time. Common metrics include **CPU usage**, **memory utilization**, **response times**, **throughput**, and **error rates**.

> 

Reviewer: Attach a screenshot of a metric visualization. The SS can be taken from the SigLens Dashboards

Author: Great idea

Metrics play a vital role in overseeing system performance, pinpointing irregularities, and uncovering patterns that could signify either emerging problems or chances for optimization. These metrics are usually gathered and consolidated from diverse origins within the system, including applications, servers, and infrastructure components.

## 3. Traces 🔍

Traces are a record of the execution path of a request as it moves through a distributed system. They provide detailed information about each step taken by the request, including timestamps, service interactions, and any errors encountered along the way. 

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be worth it to attach an example and screenshot here about traces. We can talk about a  2-3 functions working together, and the tracing data for that is time taken to go from Func A to Func B to Func C. Feel free to include a different example which might be easier to understand

Traces help developers and operators understand how requests flow through their systems, making it easier to identify bottlenecks, diagnose problems, and optimize performance.

### Instrumentation for traces

> Instrumentation for traces involves modifying your code to add specific instructions that capture information about how requests move through your system-specific libraries or frameworks to generate trace data as requests flow through a distributed system. This instrumentation captures details such as request origins, service interactions, and timing information at various points within the system. It typically requires adding **code snippets** or **middleware** to applications to generate and propagate trace information across different services. Examples of instrumentation libraries commonly used for tracing include OpenTelemetry, Jaeger, Zipkin, and Datadog APM.

Reviewer: `This instrumentation captures details such as request origins, service interactions, and timing information at various points within the system`
Let's keep these as bullet points.

`Examples of instrumentation libraries commonly used for tracing include OpenTelemetry, Jaeger, Zipkin, and Datadog APM.` 
I think we shouldn't mention about the other tools, since SigLens is an alternative for them. Let's just talk about OpenTelemetry

Author: Okay, I'll convert them to bullet points.

Do you think we should mention OTEL as well as Siglens?

## 4. Events👁️‍🗨️

Events refer to significant occurrences or actions within a system that are captured and recorded for monitoring, analysis, and processing.

These events can range from routine system operations, such as application startup or shutdown, to **critical errors**, **security breaches**, or **performance anomalies**. By logging events, teams can track system behaviour, identify trends, and respond promptly to issues. Events typically contain information such as **timestamps**, **event descriptions**, **severity levels**, and **contextual data** to provide insight into what happened and when.

## 5. DevSecOps🔐

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps we can add a hyperlink for a resource about `DevOps` for any folks that aren't familiar with the term `DevOps`
